README.md, before:

# Kubernetes the Kubernetes Way

This tutorial walks you through setting up Kubernetes the way the Kubernetes documentation suggests you might like to do it - using `kubeadm`.

This tutorial is written for people who have followed the tutorial [Kubernetes The Hard Way](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way/) (KTHW) by Kesley Hightower.

As such, this tutorial is called Kubernetes the Kubernetes Way (KTKW).

Similar to KWHW, this tutorial is optimized for learning. Once again, prepare to take the long route to ensure you understand each task required to bootstrap small or large clusters of Kubernetes.

If you are preparing for the Linux/CNCF Foundations' CKA exam, then this tutorial will be valuable to you. The Kubernetes clusters that we will build together will look similar to those you are asked to investigate and repair in your exam.

The results of this tutorial are not how I run Kubernetes in production, nor anyone else at Stark & Wayne (a popular consultancy to help your team stand up, run, and live with Kubernetes or Cloud Foundry). Nonetheless, please participate in raising issues or helping others' resolve their issues and questions. Also, please feel welcome to submit PRs to fix grammar (this is an official oxford comma zone), regressions from newer versions of Kubernetes, or bugs you experience and resolve. Please. I care greatly for your contributions.

## Continuing from KTHW

This KTKW tutorial differs in some noticable ways from Kelsey's KTHW labs:

* We will use official upstream Debian packages for our Ubuntu instances.
* We will use `kubeadm init` to initialize the first controller instance, and `kubeadm join` to add worker nodes, and then more controller nodes.
* The GCE cloud provider will be enabled because its useful, and requires us to explore writing `--config kubeadm.yaml` configuration files.
* SystemD will run containerd and kubelet only. Other subsystems, such as the apiserver, controller manager, and scheduler, will be run as pods upon a kubelet.
* We will start with a single controller node, and join multiple worker nodes.
* Later will will add two more controller nodes to make a highly available control plane capable of surviving downtime of one of the controller nodes.
* We will only generate a root certificate/private key pair, and a private/public key pair for service acccounts. All other server and client certificates will be automatically generated by `kubeadm`.

## Full Scripts

So that I can more easily ensure the commands in this tutorial do create working environments, especially for multiple major versions of Kubernetes, I have a bootstrap script. See the section below for examples of small and large clusters.

### Examples

The examples below assume you have installed `gcloud` CLI, have authenticated, have created a GCE project, and have targetted the project, and a region/zone.

Default 1 controller, 2 workers:

```plain
$ bootstrap-ktkw
...
$ kubectl get nodes,pods --all-namespaces
NAME                STATUS   ROLES    AGE     VERSION   INTERNAL-IP   EXTERNAL-IP      OS-IMAGE             KERNEL-VERSION   CONTAINER-RUNTIME
node/controller-0   Ready    master   4m21s   v1.16.3   10.240.0.10   35.230.85.80     Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/worker-0       Ready    <none>   2m      v1.16.3   10.240.0.20   35.227.139.140   Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/worker-1       Ready    <none>   7s      v1.16.3   10.240.0.21   34.82.228.203    Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10

NAMESPACE     NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE     IP            NODE           NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
kube-system   pod/coredns-5644d7b6d9-8h7kg               1/1     Running   0          4m3s    10.22.0.2     controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/coredns-5644d7b6d9-9hm5t               1/1     Running   0          4m3s    10.22.0.3     controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/etcd-controller-0                      1/1     Running   0          3m11s   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-apiserver-controller-0            1/1     Running   0          3m21s   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-controller-manager-controller-0   1/1     Running   0          3m7s    10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-dvrs6            1/1     Running   0          7s      10.240.0.21   worker-1       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-n64mm            1/1     Running   0          2m      10.240.0.20   worker-0       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-rz7f2            1/1     Running   0          4m3s    10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-kz8g4                       1/1     Running   0          4m3s    10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-t4mvk                       1/1     Running   0          2m      10.240.0.20   worker-0       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-xqpwp                       1/1     Running   0          7s      10.240.0.21   worker-1       <none>           <none>
```

3 controllers, 3 workers:

```plain
$ MASTERS=3 WORKERS=3 bootstrap-ktkw
...
$ kubectl get nodes,pods --all-namespaces
NAME                STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION   INTERNAL-IP   EXTERNAL-IP       OS-IMAGE             KERNEL-VERSION   CONTAINER-RUNTIME
node/controller-0   Ready    master   26m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.10   35.227.139.140    Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/controller-1   Ready    master   23m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.11   35.230.85.80      Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/controller-2   Ready    master   21m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.12   104.196.241.199   Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/worker-0       Ready    <none>   19m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.20   34.82.228.203     Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/worker-1       Ready    <none>   17m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.21   34.82.91.107      Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/worker-2       Ready    <none>   15m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.22   35.233.134.26     Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10

NAMESPACE     NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP            NODE           NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
kube-system   pod/coredns-5644d7b6d9-cmk9k               1/1     Running   0          25m   10.244.0.3    controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/coredns-5644d7b6d9-xbql2               1/1     Running   0          25m   10.244.0.2    controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/etcd-controller-0                      1/1     Running   0          25m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/etcd-controller-1                      1/1     Running   0          23m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/etcd-controller-2                      1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-apiserver-controller-0            1/1     Running   0          25m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-apiserver-controller-1            1/1     Running   1          23m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-apiserver-controller-2            1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-controller-manager-controller-0   1/1     Running   1          24m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-controller-manager-controller-1   1/1     Running   0          22m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-controller-manager-controller-2   1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-5xt7c            1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-8qfg6            1/1     Running   0          19m   10.240.0.20   worker-0       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-dlccw            1/1     Running   0          15m   10.240.0.22   worker-2       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-jxhst            1/1     Running   1          23m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-k5jfs            1/1     Running   0          17m   10.240.0.21   worker-1       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-sxvbk            1/1     Running   0          25m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-6b2pn                       1/1     Running   0          17m   10.240.0.21   worker-1       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-8r6ft                       1/1     Running   0          15m   10.240.0.22   worker-2       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-bhn4g                       1/1     Running   0          25m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-cnmmh                       1/1     Running   0          23m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-gwwcv                       1/1     Running   0          19m   10.240.0.20   worker-0       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-hwzbl                       1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-scheduler-controller-0            1/1     Running   1          25m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-scheduler-controller-1            1/1     Running   0          22m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-scheduler-controller-2            1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
```

## Cleanup

To delete the instances and all GCE networking:

```plain
destroy-ktkw
```

Commit message:

bootstrap-ktkw --kube 1.15.5 --masters 1 --workers 3

README.md, after:

# Kubernetes the Kubernetes Way

This tutorial walks you through setting up Kubernetes the way the Kubernetes documentation suggests you might like to do it - using `kubeadm`.

This tutorial is written for people who have followed the tutorial [Kubernetes The Hard Way](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way/) (KTHW) by Kesley Hightower.

As such, this tutorial is called Kubernetes the Kubernetes Way (KTKW).

Similar to KWHW, this tutorial is optimized for learning. Once again, prepare to take the long route to ensure you understand each task required to bootstrap small or large clusters of Kubernetes.

If you are preparing for the Linux/CNCF Foundations' CKA exam, then this tutorial will be valuable to you. The Kubernetes clusters that we will build together will look similar to those you are asked to investigate and repair in your exam.

The results of this tutorial are not how I run Kubernetes in production, nor anyone else at Stark & Wayne (a popular consultancy to help your team stand up, run, and live with Kubernetes or Cloud Foundry). Nonetheless, please participate in raising issues or helping others' resolve their issues and questions. Also, please feel welcome to submit PRs to fix grammar (this is an official oxford comma zone), regressions from newer versions of Kubernetes, or bugs you experience and resolve. Please. I care greatly for your contributions.

## Continuing from KTHW

This KTKW tutorial differs in some noticable ways from Kelsey's KTHW labs:

* We will use official upstream Debian packages for our Ubuntu instances.
* We will use `kubeadm init` to initialize the first controller instance, and `kubeadm join` to add worker nodes, and then more controller nodes.
* The GCE cloud provider will be enabled because its useful, and requires us to explore writing `--config kubeadm.yaml` configuration files.
* SystemD will run containerd and kubelet only. Other subsystems, such as the apiserver, controller manager, and scheduler, will be run as pods upon a kubelet.
* We will start with a single controller node, and join multiple worker nodes.
* Later will will add two more controller nodes to make a highly available control plane capable of surviving downtime of one of the controller nodes.
* We will only generate a root certificate/private key pair, and a private/public key pair for service acccounts. All other server and client certificates will be automatically generated by `kubeadm`.

## Full Scripts

So that I can more easily ensure the commands in this tutorial do create working environments, especially for multiple major versions of Kubernetes, I have a bootstrap script. See the section below for examples of small and large clusters.

### Examples

The examples below assume you have installed `gcloud` CLI, have authenticated, have created a GCE project, and have targetted the project, and a region/zone.

You can provide flags to specify the number of master/controllers, workers, and the version of Kubernetes to install:

```plain
bootstrap-ktkw --kube 1.15.5 --masters 1 --workers 3
```

The default `bootstrap-ktkw` will deploy 1 controller, 2 workers, with the latest Kubernetes:

```plain
$ bootstrap-ktkw
...
$ kubectl get nodes,pods --all-namespaces
NAME                STATUS   ROLES    AGE     VERSION   INTERNAL-IP   EXTERNAL-IP      OS-IMAGE             KERNEL-VERSION   CONTAINER-RUNTIME
node/controller-0   Ready    master   4m21s   v1.16.3   10.240.0.10   35.230.85.80     Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/worker-0       Ready    <none>   2m      v1.16.3   10.240.0.20   35.227.139.140   Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/worker-1       Ready    <none>   7s      v1.16.3   10.240.0.21   34.82.228.203    Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10

NAMESPACE     NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE     IP            NODE           NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
kube-system   pod/coredns-5644d7b6d9-8h7kg               1/1     Running   0          4m3s    10.22.0.2     controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/coredns-5644d7b6d9-9hm5t               1/1     Running   0          4m3s    10.22.0.3     controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/etcd-controller-0                      1/1     Running   0          3m11s   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-apiserver-controller-0            1/1     Running   0          3m21s   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-controller-manager-controller-0   1/1     Running   0          3m7s    10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-dvrs6            1/1     Running   0          7s      10.240.0.21   worker-1       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-n64mm            1/1     Running   0          2m      10.240.0.20   worker-0       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-rz7f2            1/1     Running   0          4m3s    10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-kz8g4                       1/1     Running   0          4m3s    10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-t4mvk                       1/1     Running   0          2m      10.240.0.20   worker-0       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-xqpwp                       1/1     Running   0          7s      10.240.0.21   worker-1       <none>           <none>
```

3 controllers, 3 workers:

```plain
$ bootstrap-ktkw --masters 3 --workers 3
...
$ kubectl get nodes,pods --all-namespaces
NAME                STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION   INTERNAL-IP   EXTERNAL-IP       OS-IMAGE             KERNEL-VERSION   CONTAINER-RUNTIME
node/controller-0   Ready    master   26m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.10   35.227.139.140    Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/controller-1   Ready    master   23m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.11   35.230.85.80      Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/controller-2   Ready    master   21m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.12   104.196.241.199   Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/worker-0       Ready    <none>   19m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.20   34.82.228.203     Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/worker-1       Ready    <none>   17m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.21   34.82.91.107      Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10
node/worker-2       Ready    <none>   15m   v1.16.3   10.240.0.22   35.233.134.26     Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS   5.0.0-1025-gcp   containerd://1.2.10

NAMESPACE     NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP            NODE           NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
kube-system   pod/coredns-5644d7b6d9-cmk9k               1/1     Running   0          25m   10.244.0.3    controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/coredns-5644d7b6d9-xbql2               1/1     Running   0          25m   10.244.0.2    controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/etcd-controller-0                      1/1     Running   0          25m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/etcd-controller-1                      1/1     Running   0          23m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/etcd-controller-2                      1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-apiserver-controller-0            1/1     Running   0          25m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-apiserver-controller-1            1/1     Running   1          23m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-apiserver-controller-2            1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-controller-manager-controller-0   1/1     Running   1          24m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-controller-manager-controller-1   1/1     Running   0          22m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-controller-manager-controller-2   1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-5xt7c            1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-8qfg6            1/1     Running   0          19m   10.240.0.20   worker-0       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-dlccw            1/1     Running   0          15m   10.240.0.22   worker-2       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-jxhst            1/1     Running   1          23m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-k5jfs            1/1     Running   0          17m   10.240.0.21   worker-1       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-flannel-ds-amd64-sxvbk            1/1     Running   0          25m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-6b2pn                       1/1     Running   0          17m   10.240.0.21   worker-1       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-8r6ft                       1/1     Running   0          15m   10.240.0.22   worker-2       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-bhn4g                       1/1     Running   0          25m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-cnmmh                       1/1     Running   0          23m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-gwwcv                       1/1     Running   0          19m   10.240.0.20   worker-0       <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-proxy-hwzbl                       1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-scheduler-controller-0            1/1     Running   1          25m   10.240.0.10   controller-0   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-scheduler-controller-1            1/1     Running   0          22m   10.240.0.11   controller-1   <none>           <none>
kube-system   pod/kube-scheduler-controller-2            1/1     Running   0          21m   10.240.0.12   controller-2   <none>           <none>
```

## Cleanup

To delete the instances and all GCE networking:

```plain
destroy-ktkw
```
